Okay, back in our slides, I want us
to talk about garbage collection.
And while I got these slides projected,
I just want you to look back at
the code that we've just worked on.
And I want you to see just how many
places that we are just treating for
free that we can create an array and
return it back and
spread it into another array and throw
it into a set and create another array.
This is one of those cases where
JavaScript makes that super ergonomic and
quite honestly, it's pretty performant in
doing it, we don't see a big penalty for
doing it.
So it ends up creating some pretty
reasonably nice code for us to write.
The C programmers of the world
are cringing because they're like
that dot-dot-dot is like 6,000
lines of its own complexity and
all the memory implications,
and all that other stuff.
At our layer of abstraction, we just sort
of treat it as almost a free operation.
And one of the things that you need
to get good at as an algorithmist is,
even though you do play in some
particular layer of abstraction,
you shouldn't be completely
ignorant of the layer below.
You should be at least competent
at understanding the layer below.
For us, that's what JavaScript is managing
memory-wise underneath the covers.
So I want us to talk about the creation
and throwing away of a whole bunch of
arrays as temporary transport values,
that's basically what we're doing here.
And I wanna talk about an approach
that you sometimes might employ
to reduce the pressure on the garbage
collector in our programs.
Why is that important?
Because it is always the case that
in the small, we test things out and
everything works.
And then in production,
we end up starting to see people complain
that our animations start to just
randomly be janky or there's a delay when
somebody clicks something or whatever.
And it seems very unpredictable.
And that's because we can't really predict
or control when the JavaScript engine is
gonna say, you've put out too
many bags of trash at the curb.
I gotta come by and pick them all up and
I gotta collect all the garbage.
We don't really control that.
We're not suppose to control it,
but we don't control it.
And yet, it is actually
an important factor that plays into
the real experienced performance
that our users have.
It may not end up showing
up in your test week, but
real users will experience the effects of
us being lazy about garbage collection.
So as a little bit of a detour here,
I wanted us to spend just a brief
moment talking about minimizing
our garbage collection.
And there's a technique for doing this.
Obviously, if there's a way for
you to say, I don't need an array here,
I could return something else,
just don't do the array.
But the way we wrote our algorithm, we
kinda based it on the ability to like make
arrays and return partial arrays and
concatenate them together.
The algorithm kind of just
assumes all of these arrays, so
it would be difficult to
avoid returning them.
But there is a technique that we can
use to cut down drastically on just
how many arrays that we need.
And that technique is referred
to as an object pool.
So put simply an object pool
front loads the creation of
some number of instances of some value,
usually a data structure like an array or
an object.
It could be an instance of a class or
something but, If I know for example,
that at any given time, I only need 25
of this thing, whatever this thing is.
I could pre-create all 25 of them and
then, not that much unlike
a library when I need one of them,
I could check one of them out,
use it, reset it, and
then check it back into the library.
And if 25 was the most that
I ever need concurrently,
then I might end up putting back and
checking out hundreds or
thousands or millions of times.
But notice that I only ever created 25.
If they were arrays in our case,
I only ever created 25 arrays.
Even though at any given time,
I might have 13 checked out and
then put a few back and
then get 12 more and put a few back.
But I never go above 25,
then I've drastically reduced it
from the thousands or
millions of arrays down to 25.
Does that make sense?
>> This is analogous to the process that
databases use for repeated queries and
essentially caching correct
that we know that there's so
much information in the set.
We know what our maximum overhead is,
so we materialize that,
which makes it readily available for
lookup.
Instead of sitting somewhere, we have to
compute it, we compute it, dump it, and
make it available.
Is that the same loop that
we're describing here?
>> Possibly, I will say that I'm
certainly not sufficiently well-versed
in the internals of database
implementation to speak to what they do.
But I can say that as
a correlated relationship, yes,
the concept of resource pooling as
a broader version of object pooling.
Resource pooling is extremely common when
we're dealing with fixed, finite, and
expensive resources,
like network interface connections and
database connections,
and things like that.
It is extremely common that you might
create three or four database connection
in a pool because you know,
you don't really need all of them.
But you don't wanna create and
throw away and create and
throw away that's very expensive,
performance-wise and memory-wise.
So, yes, the broader idea of
resource pooling is very common.
Whether you're dealing
with garbage collection or
not, you just simply don't wanna create
and destroy a whole bunch of memory cuz it
fragments your memory and
it wastes CPU performance and so forth.
So this use, reset, recycle loop, that's
the conceptual thing to think about.
Now another extension to this pool is,
sometimes you don't know how many unique.
So you might start the pool at five and
then just let it run, and what happens
if you try to check out the sixth array
when you started out your pool at five?
You might think, I guess that fails or
there's no more array.
Well, the general response is,
you just grow the size of the pool
according to how many you asked for.
So if I started it at five,
I could grow the size to six and
give you the sixth one.
But we have this general
principle of what's
called exponential backoff in timings.
And we use this a very similar principle
here, which is to say, if I asked for
the sixth one, you start out with five and
I've now asked for the sixth one.
There's a pretty good chance, I'm probably
gonna ask for a seventh, eighth, and
ninth one.
So rather than just give you six and
then grow it to seven and then grow
at eight and grow, how about if just every
time you ask for one more than I have.
I'll just double the size of my pool.
So I'll go from 5 to 10, because there's
statistically a pretty good chance that
you're gonna want 7, 8, 9, and 10.
And then if you ask for the 11th one,
I'll just add another 10 to the pool,
10 that are out and another 10 that
creates a total pool size would have been
20 or total capacity would have been 20.
And I'll give you the 11th one.
And then after you go past the 20th one,
I'll make the capacity 40 and
give you the 21st one.
So that's the general idea of a data
structure like this object pool,
is that you just ask it to
give you a new value and
you don't really worry about it too much.
But you do want to sometimes
kind of fine tune the pool size.
If you started out too small,
you end up with too many doublings.
If you started out too large,
you end up with wasted arrays or
wasted instances that you never use.
Do you follow me?
So you could just use the object
pool right out of the box.
However, it's been implemented and
not worry about it.
It'll take care of its own doubling and
giving you new values.
But in the end, if you're gonna go to
the trouble of using an object pool.
You'd probably eventually wanna try to
fine tune it down to a number closer to
what you probably need.
Because there's no real
reason to let it double and
have to pay that penalty in the runtime.
If you know up front, I need 23,
just go ahead and set it to like 23 or
25 and then you're good.
You follow where I'm coming from?
If you know that you need 10,000,
I might not set it to 10,000,
cuz that's an awful lot
of upfront allocation.
I might let that grow as my application
goes, cuz maybe I need 10,000,
but maybe only 1% of the time
do I ever need 10,000.
So that one might be a case
where I'd set it to like 500 and
let it grow itself to those bigger numbers
in the rare cases where we really need is.
There's a lot of little fine tuning and
subjective judgment that you make and
you wanna benchmark, but
that's the general concept of
an object pool as a data structure.
So how does that apply to our code?
This is going to be a little bit
more intrusive on our coding style,
it's a little bit annoying to work with,
but we get this big payoff in terms of
how many fewer objects we're just throwing
down at the curb to be garbage collected.
Far less chances that we're
gonna have animations or
other things that become janky
because of garbage collection.
So we'll switch back
over to our code editor.
And we are now on
the option three branch or
we are now finished with option two,
that's the starting point.
But you'll notice in the option three
branch, I've included a library that does
an object pool for
us rather than us implementing our own.
That library I happen to have authored.
I wrote this like seven or eight years
ago, it's called deePool, D-E-E-P-O-O-L.
So it's just in there in the option three
branch, you can switch to option three and
grab it and copy it out if you want,
get it off of the GitHub repo.
However you wanna grab that, or
you can get it off of
NPM again D-E-E-P-O-O-L.
So deePool is my attempt at writing
the most stripped down least feature rich,
but most performant object pool
that I could possibly imagine.
And I spent a considerable amount
of effort tuning and benchmarking
the performance, but big disclaimer here,
I'm not a performance engineer.
I'm not one of those ones who went and
looked at the internal guts of VA aid and
like tried to figure out
all the nuanced quirks.
I just did my best to take out
all the frills and give a very,
very stripped down version
of an object pool.
It uses a very simple Round Robin strategy
to prevent the memory from getting over
clustered and it Round Robins
through an array and all that stuff.
All of those details are in that tool.
You can completely ignore
this library from here on.
I'm not trying to sell anybody on using
it, but I wanted us to have an object pool
to use, so I pulled out this
whole project that I've written.
So how are we gonna use deePool.
If you've gone and gotten it and
you have it, you can just import it.
So we're gonna import deePool and
I put it in the external directory.